# Swing Length Predictor
Baseball can be viewed as both one of the easiest and hardest game to master due to its simplicity of play, high skill requirements, and deep strategic underpinnings. Strategies range from pre-game decisions such as lineup or hitting order to in-game split second decisions like which pitch to throw or how to swing. No interaction in the game is more steeped in strategy than that of the interaction of the pitcher and the batter. Everything is done to gain an advantage over the other. Each pitch thrown has the aim of getting the batter out or preventing runs from being scored, but can pitchers do more? The question arises: can the pitcher dictate the batter's swing? If so, to what extent is the swing due to the properties of pitch itself or to the pitcher individually? Such an advantage over a batter would significantly improve the odds of controlling a batter at the plate and lead to a successful defense. In baseball, even the slightest edge can have a dramatic impact on the game, making any potential for an advantage interesting. 

This analysis seeks to answer the question of whether a pitcher can dictate a batter’s swing and to what extent the effect is due to the pitch or the individual pitcher. The focus of the analysis was strictly on the effect of the pitch and the pitcher. It did not consider any of the strategic considerations that may have also influenced a batter’s swing, such as the proximity of the infielders or a runner on base. To examine the strength of the effects of the pitch and pitcher on a swing, a regression model was used to predict the batter’s swing length. Several baseline regression models were constructed, including a K-nearest neighbor regression, a decision tree regression, a random forest regression, and a gradient boosted tree regression. The models were then compared and the best-performing baseline model, the gradient boosted tree, was tuned to improve performance. The permuted feature importance scores were calculated and analyzed to examine whether the pitcher or the pitch had a greater impact on the batter's swing.

The properties of the pitch were found to be more important in predicting swing lengths than the pitchers themselves. The pitchers individually were not important in predicting the swing length. No feature representing a pitcher had an average feature importance above 0.0016. Instead, the properties of the pitch were more important in predicting the swing length against a pitch. In particular, the pitch’s horizontal and vertical locations when it crossed the plate from the catcher's perspective. Similarly, the velocity and acceleration of the pitch were found to be important in predicting the swing length. The final model was found to explain only about 41.4% of the variance in the batter's swing lengths, suggesting that there are additional factors that likely help in explaining the differences in swing lengths. The analysis may be enhanced by including features that reflect the batter's strategic considerations, such as whether a runner was on base or the number of strikes and balls before the pitch. Future research areas may include examining how a batter's stance, location in the batting box, or physical features could affect the batter's swing.

## Data
https://statds.org/events/csas2025/challenge.html
File used: statcast_pitch_swing_data_20240402_20241030_with_arm_angle2.csv
